
MicroGnuEmacs 2a for primos

This version has only been tested under primos 21.0 (.0, .1, .2s) in
32ix mode.  The dired code does not run in 64v mode.  (pl1 type ptr
options(short) is a pain to simulate in 64v mode C.)  The pre-rev 21
code should work, but ^p, ^j, and a true meta key will be unusable.

One major problem has been descovered: mg will always fail if it is
already in memory.  (access violations, illegal segno, etc.) This is a
bug that has been reported to prime.  I recomend aliasing mg to remepf
mg;mg .  (Further oddity: sometime remepf gets access violations!) To
get your line back to a normal mode after this has happended, set your
terminal's parity to mark and type "set_async -pro tty -echo -xoff"
followed by a linefeed.

Some pre-21 verisons of the C library had a bug in open(), there is
code that can be included with a #define in fileio.c to avoid this
problem.  The -pbstring option is broken in some Prime C compiler
versions, if you notice strange problems try recompiling with
-lbstring.

The rev 21 version will not run over primenet since the terminal line
cannot be conditioned properly.

Support for Prime's extended character set rather than a meta key
should not be hard to add.  (chrdef.h, cinfo.c, and ttyio.c are what
would need changes.)

Installation:
  copy *>sys>prime>make.cpl
  ph make -ph -como             [add -64v if 64v mode is needed.]
When phantom is finished:
  copy mg.run cmdnc0>==         [32ix mode]
or
  copy mg.64v.run cmdnc0>=.run  [64v mode]

Global variable .termcap (or .termcap$) should be set to the pathname
of the termcap file if the default of mg*>termcap is inappropraite,
and .terminal_type$ (or .term) should be set to your terminal type.
(Global variables are manipulated with the primos commands
define_gvar, set_var, and list_var.) The C library must be in your
search rules.  Your .mg initalization file should be located in your
inital attach point, if you don't have one the one in mg* will be used
if available.  (Terminal specific files may also be used.) Prime
emacs's termcap file does not work well with mg.

On pre-rev 21 systems, due to primos limitations, neither ^P or ^J are
usable input, and true meta keys are not supported.  If ^P is
accidentaly typed and you have break enabled, mg may be resumed with
the start command (and the screen should be refreshed with the
recenter command ^L).

Primos programs other than mg and the C compiler do not understand tab
characters, so use of notab mode is recomended.

The options to make.cpl are:

    -ph         chap -idle
    -como       create como file make.como
    -64v        create 64v rather than 32ix mode version

Compilation options are in the files mg.options.c and
mg.64v.options.c.

Warnings to potential modifiers:

        The source to mg contains tab characters.  These should be
converted to spaces before printing or editing with an editor that
does not cope with tabs.

	Make.cpl does not have all dependencies, if one of the new .h
files is changed, delete all applicable .bin files.
