rename softfp as xx
rename xx as softfp
rename softfplib as xx
rename xx as softfplib
rename softstart as xx
rename xx as softstart
rename sort.c as xx
rename xx as sort.c
rename stdarg.h as xx
rename xx as stdarg.h
rename stddef.h as xx
rename xx as stddef.h
rename stdio.c as xx
rename xx as stdio.c
rename stdio.h as xx
rename xx as stdio.h
rename stdlib.c as xx
rename xx as stdlib.c
rename stdlib.h as xx
rename xx as stdlib.h
rename string.c as xx
rename xx as string.c
rename string.h as xx
rename xx as string.h
rename syn.c as xx
rename xx as syn.c
rename synprint as xx
rename xx as synprint
rename system.h as xx
rename xx as system.h
rename testarm as xx
rename xx as testarm
rename time.c as xx
rename xx as time.c
rename time.h as xx
rename xx as time.h
rename util.h as xx
rename xx as util.h
rename vargen.c as xx
rename xx as vargen.c
rename xrefs.h as xx
rename xx as xrefs.h
