This distribution contains the InterViews configuration files, manual
pages, sources, and documentation.  The man/cover subdirectory
contains nroff/troff sources for the release notes and differences
from previous releases.  These files also tell you who to contact if
you have any questions or problems.

You must configure InterViews before you can build it.  You should
read config/InterViews/README and check the configuration files in the
config and config/InterViews directories to make sure the default
build parameters are correct for your system.  You should edit your
platform's .cf file in config to correct your operating system's
version numbers if necessary.  You may also have to edit
config/InterViews/IVsite.def to define installation defaults for your
site.  If you need to modify any of the Imakefiles, consider sending
us a bug report (addressed to interviews-bugs@interviews.stanford.edu)
since you ideally should never have to edit any Imakefile.

To build InterViews, first say ``make bootstrap'' in order to install
executables that the Makefiles will use out of your PATH.  Extend your
PATH if it doesn't already include the directory containing the
installed executables and say "setenv CPU `cpu`" or "CPU=`cpu`; export
CPU" to set CPU in your environment.  The Makefiles will use CPU's
value to create subdirectories in which to put .o files for your
machine.  When you are ready, say ``make World'' to build the
InterViews sources.  Saying ``make install'' will install the
InterViews binaries and libraries in bin and lib.  That is, ``make
install'' will use only relative paths; it will not overwrite anything
in your system area.  You can create symbolic links from your system
area to InterViews to make it appear as if InterViews has been
installed in your system area.  If you would rather install InterViews
directly into your system area, you can set InstallRelative NO in
config/InterViews/IVsite.def.  

Saying ``make install.config'' will install the configuration files
into your system area so you can use Imakefiles outside of the
InterViews source tree.  Saying ``make install.include'' will install
the header files into include (that is, under this directory).  Saying
``make install.man'' will install the InterViews manual pages directly
into your system manual page area no matter what InstallRelative's
value is.  Saying ``make format'' or ``make print'' will format or
print the InterViews release notes and manual pages.
